[docs] [tutorial-revamp] - Part six, using I/O managers (#13238)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/tutorial/saving-your-data.mdx

In `__init__.py`, add the following snippet anywhere above the `def = Definitions(...)` line:

```python
from dagster import (
    AssetSelection,
    Definitions,
    ScheduleDefinition,
    define_asset_job,
    load_assets_from_modules,
    fs_io_manager # Update the imports at the top of the file to also include this
)

io_manager = fs_io_manager.configured({
    "base_dir": "data", # Path is built relative to where `dagster dev` is run
})
```

Next, update your `Definitions` (shown below) to attach the I/O manager to your code location by defining it as a **resource**.

```python
defs = Definitions(
    assets=hackernews_assets,
    schedules=[hackernews_schedule],
    resources={
        "io_manager": io_manager,
    }
)
```

<Note>
  <strong>About resources</strong>
  <br />
  I/O managers are a special type of resource, a Dagster concept for{" "}
  <strong>connecting</strong> to external services. I/O managers are resources
  made specifically to control reading and writing to external services. Refer
  to the <a href="/concepts/resources">Resources documentation</a> for more
  information.
</Note>

> To see the effect of this change, reload your code location in the Dagster UI and materialize your assets. When you click on an asset, you’ll see the `path` metadata pointing to a local storage directory.

Reviewer: Even without this, it points to a local storage directory, right? We should explain what's different.

> Look at your Dagster project in your file system (via Finder or Windows Explorer) and you’ll find a new directory called `data` that contains your materialized assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look at your Dagster project in your file system (via terminal, Finder, or Windows Explorer) and you’ll find a new directory called `data` that contains your materialized assets.
```

> This is a short example of how powerful I/O managers are. In a few lines of code, assets previously stored in ephemeral storage can now be saved **anywhere**. With I/O managers, you can save your assets to places like AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage, or Azure Blob Storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a short example of the value of I/O managers. In a few lines of code, assets previously stored in ephemeral storage can now be saved to many locations supported by the Dagster team and community. With I/O managers, you can save your assets to places like AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage, or Azure Blob Storage.
```

In addition to file storage systems, I/O managers can connect to any service from which data can be read or written, such as databases.

---

## Step 2: Writing to databases

In data engineering, a common asset is tabular data. These are often seen as database tables or DataFrames in memory. I/O managers translate between tables and in-memory data formats.

> Dagster includes out-of-the-box IO managers for common databases, such as DuckDB. When a DataFrame is returned in an asset’s function, it is translated and written into the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dagster includes out-of-the-box IO managers for common databases, such as DuckDB. When a DataFrame is returned in an asset’s definition, it is translated into a database-compatible format. The I/O manager then runs a SQL query to write the data into the database.
```

> Let’s modify our pipeline to store our `topstories` DataFrame as a table in DuckDB. We’ll use Dagster’s out-of-the-box I/O manager for DuckDB, an easy-to-set-up database that doesn't require any long-running processes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s modify our pipeline to store our `topstories` DataFrame as a table in DuckDB. We’ll use Dagster’s I/O manager for DuckDB, a database that runs on your computer without any setup on your end.
```

### Setting up I/O managers

Adding an I/O manager for a database is similar to connecting it to a file storage system. The biggest difference is you must specify what **type** of DataFrame to use when the data is loaded into Dagster’s memory. In this tutorial, you’ll use DuckDB to store the data and Pandas DataFrames to work with the data.

Update your `__init__.py` to reflect the changes below:

```python
from dagster_duckdb import build_duckdb_io_manager
from dagster_duckdb_pandas import DuckDBPandasTypeHandler
# Add the imports to the top
# These imports let you define how Dagster communicates with DuckDB

# Insert this section anywhere above your `defs = Definitions(...)`

> duckdb_io_manager = build_duckdb_io_manager([DuckDBPandasTypeHandler()]).configured({

Reviewer: I think it would be simpler to just use `duckdb_pandas_io_manager`, to avoid needing to go into the TypeHandler business.

    "database": "analytics.hackernews"
})

# Update your Definitions
defs = Definitions(

>     assets=[*hackernews_assets],

Author: Ahh got it, thanks for catching this!

    schedules=[hackernews_schedule],
    resources={
        "io_manager": io_manager,
        "database_io_manager": duckdb_io_manager # Define the I/O manager here
    }
)
```

The four changes here are:

> - `dagster_duckdb` and `dagster_duckdb_pandas` are imported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Two Python packages, `dagster_duckdb` and `dagster_duckdb_pandas`, are imported to be used further down.
```

Or something. Feel like I could've been more explicit about what was being imported.

    df = pd.DataFrame(results).drop(["kids"], axis=1)

    return Output(
        value=df,
        metadata={
            "num_records": len(df),
            "preview": MetadataValue.md(df.head().to_markdown()),
        }
    )
```

To validate that this worked, materialize your entire asset graph again using the Dagster UI. The I/O manager should store the DataFrame in a table called `analytics.hackernews.topstories` and continue to store the IDs and word cloud in a directory called `data`.

Despite the changes in where the data is stored, the developer experience hasn’t changed. I/O managers deal with reading/writing data from storage for you so you can focus on the core logic and computation.

---

## Next steps

Congratulations! 🎉 You've written your first pipeline in Dagster!

This section of the tutorial shows some of the simplest possible uses of I/O managers. However, this is the tip of the iceberg of what can be done with I/O managers.

Once you’ve outgrown being able to load all your data into memory in one chunk, you should learn about [partitions](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions) and how they are used to load only slices of your data into memory.

> Assets don’t need to use I/O managers. Sometimes it’s impossible to separate business logic from I/O, or you’ll never want to load the data into memory. In situations like these, you’re able to not return any data, and dependencies can be defined without loading data in the dependent asset’s function. Refer to the [Assets without arguments and values guide](https://docs.dagster.io/tutorial/assets/non-argument-deps) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assets don’t need to use I/O managers. Sometimes it’s impossible to separate business logic from I/O, or you’ll never want to load the data into memory. In situations like these, you’re able to not return any data, and dependencies can be defined without loading data in the dependent asset’s function. Refer to the [Assets without I/O](/guides/dagster/non-argument-deps) for more information.
```

Author: ty for catching this!

---
title: "Tutorial, part six: Saving your data | Dagster Docs"
description: Learn how to use I/O managers to save your data.
---

# Tutorial, part six: Saving your data

> You've written a data pipeline using assets and had it rebuilt every hour by now. Currently, your assets are stored in a temporary folder that is deleted after closing the `dagster` process. **Note**: If you set up Dagster without the tutorial, you may have set a `DAGSTER_HOME` environment variable. If so, then your assets will be stored in that directory.

Author: Probably a nit, but ending the first sentence with `by now` feels odd to me. It doesn't technically change the meaning, but I read it as "the pipeline is rebuilt by now" and not "By now I've written a pipeline that's rebuilt"

Does that make sense? Feel free to ignore me if I'm grasping at straws 🥤

You likely want to store your assets in places such as tables in your database or files in cloud storage. To do this, Dagster has I/O managers that enable reading and writing data to storage systems.

By the end of this section, you will:

- Store your files in a file system
- Store your data frames as tables in a database
- Learn about I/O managers

---

## What are I/O managers?

I/O stands for **input** and **output.** I/O managers are Dagster objects that control how Dagster reads and writes data to specific external services, such as Snowflake or Amazon Web Services (AWS) S3.

They manage **input** by reading an asset from where it’s stored and loading it into memory to be used by a dependent asset. For example, `topstories_word_cloud` needs `topstories`. Therefore, the I/O manager that `topstories` uses will load the data into memory so the `topstories_word_cloud` asset can use it.

I/O managers control \*_output_ by writing the asset's to the location configured. By the end of this section, you’ll configure an I/O manager to write the `hackernews_topstories` DataFrame into a database as a table.

> <Note>

Reviewer: My instinct would be to leave this out, because it's kind of comparing apples to orange - in-memory _processing_ vs. on-disk _storage_. The main reason we load data into memory isn't because it's faster, it's because computers can't run instructions on data that's on disk (other than loading that data into memory).

If someone is skimming this, they might get the misconception that, if they're not using an IO manager, their data is stored in memory.

  information.
</Note>

To see the effect of this change, reload your code location in the Dagster UI and materialize your assets. When you click on an asset, you’ll see the `path` metadata pointing to the `data` directory on your computer.

Look at your Dagster project in your file system (via terminal, Finder, or Windows Explorer) and you’ll find a new directory called `data` that contains your materialized assets.

This is a short example of the value of I/O managers. In a few lines of code, assets previously stored in ephemeral memory can now be saved to many locations. With I/O managers, you can save your assets to places like AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage, or Azure Blob Storage.

In addition to file storage systems, I/O managers can connect to any service from which data can be read or written, such as databases.

---

## Step 2: Writing to databases

In data engineering, a common asset is tabular data. These are often seen as database tables or DataFrames in-memory. In Dagster, I/O managers define the relationship between how data is saved as a table in the database and what in-memory data format to represent the data as.

> Dagster includes out-of-the-box IO managers for common databases, such as DuckDB. When a DataFrame is returned in an asset’s definition, it is translated into a database-compatible format. The I/O manager then runs a SQL query to write the data into the database.

Author: ```suggestion
Dagster includes out-of-the-box I/O managers for common databases, such as DuckDB. When a DataFrame is returned in an asset’s definition, it is translated into a database-compatible format. The I/O manager then runs a SQL query to write the data into the database.
```

I'm annoyed with myself for not catching this before now 🤦‍♀️

Reviewer 2: How's the Grammarly configuring goin'? You shouldn't have to be annoyed at yourself, but even then, we should have Grammarly catch this.
